# Did the Haiti EQ have greater primary effects than Japan's?
## Haiti EQ
### Introduction
On the 12th of January, 2010, at 16:53 local time, an earthquake occurred in Haiti. It reached 7.0 on the richter scale, compared to the 9.0 reached by the Japanese Earthquake and Tsunami on the 11th of March, 2011. Even though 9.0 > 7.0, it may have been a lot harder for Haiti to deal with the effects of the earthquake. When comparing the effects of the two EQs, it almost creates an equilibrium when the ability of the country to recover, and the size of the earthquake, are considered. However, it might not. What if this equation proves that the effects were greater on Haiti? Well, let's find out.
### Primary and Secondary Impacts
Before I begin, I need to define what a Primary and a Secondary impact is. A primary impact is a direct result of the earthquake, while a secondary impact comes with, or is caused by, a primary impact. For example, if someone got killed by the earthquake, that would be a primary impact. A secondary impact would be, for example, that it may make that person's family very emotional.
### Economic Impact
As I pointed out earlier, Haiti isn't nearly as economically developed as Japan. As a result of this, or you might say primary impact, is that they are less able to put safety protocols in place, given that they require expensive resources. However, Japan is more than capable of this, and that may mean that the effects of this may render Haiti incapable of dealing with the earthquake as well as Japan. So, when Haiti does try to combat the earthquake, or at least clean up after it, they may be forced to spend money that they don't necessarily have. This could put Haiti in a lot of debt, and their economy would be left even worse than it was in the first place. This may result in Haiti's government being unable to invest in areas such as healthcare, education, public transport, etc. This is a secondary impact. Let me explain why. Property being destroyed is a primary impact of the earthquake, and the fact that they have to pay for repairations comes with it. Thus meaning that it is a secondary impact as it comes as a result of a primary impact.
### Social Impact
People's bussinesses may be destroyed and people may lose their jobs. People may also lose family members, and the morale of the people in Haiti will be significantly decreased. This may increase suicide rates in Haiti, and Haiti will be left as quite a miserable place to live. A primary impact of the earthquake was the large amount of deaths caused by it. The earthquake killed around 230,000 people, and destroyed around 180,000 homes. This again contributing to the low morale of the people left, and again, rendering Haiti as a miserable place to live.
### Enviromental Impact
Because of earthquakes like this, forest coverage in Haiti has dropped from 60% to 2%. I'd say that is past moderately drastic. When there is no forest cover, heavy rain erodes the land, and causes flash floods. Because of this, Haiti also suffers a lot more during hurricanes than the neighbouring Dominican Republic. Water-borne illness could run rampant and chemicals and oil could leak out of damaged storage facilities as a result of the magnitude 7.0 earthquake that ripped Haiti apart. The earthquake may also destroy the miniscule amount of trees left in Haiti. This could mean that there are less organisms which can complete photosynthesis, and produce the biproduct of oxygen. This would mean that there is less oxygen for the people of Haiti to breath.
### Conclusion
The Haiti earthquake was, with no doubt, a devastating event for the people and enviroment of Haiti. The effects, however, may have been lesser if Haiti was a more economically developed nation. The people of Haiti would have been left in a miserable state, and people would have nothing much to do as their work premises may have been destroyed, and children may no longer be able to go to school as a result of this. So, in conclusion, Haiti was absolutely destroyed, in more ways than one, by this earthquake. Their economy took a hit, their people took a hit, and the enviroment took a hit.
## Japan EQ
### Introduction
On the 11 March 2011, at 14:46 JST (05:46 UTC), a devastating earthquake hit Japan. The epicentre was off the east coast of Sendai. This earthquake reached 9.0 on the richter scale. As the earthquake was underwater, a tsunami came with it. The tsunami swept across the north east of Japan. It took along buildings, people, and important infrastructure.